Presumably, you mean if you were to build - on Azure - a service in competition with other MS or Azure service offerings, does
this mean that Microsoft's IP clauses would indemnify you by the given right to assume a choice of patent from their portfolio,
to counter Microsoft's suit or potential suit for infringement, if you *in your service created new IP that Microsoft
challenges*?

First of all, the concept of offering a customer indemnity against your own actions, through assignment of one of the 10,000
patents, would likely be seen to create a nullity [0].

Such a situation appears strongly to create a number of nullities, which would bar estoppel relief or relief in claim.

The most clear logical nullity, is in the generally conceived arrangement of insurance or risk mitigation:

Here Microsoft is 1. both the issuer of a form of indemnity insurance, as well as the licensor of certain rights under "IP
protection"; 2. potentially the licensor - assignor or further IP in the form of a selectively chosen patent, explicitly offered
in the event of that being of utility to defense of litigation against the contracted licensee (Azure customer) where a 3rd
party asserts infringement of their patent rights and - strongly implied enough to be a clause read into this agreement by
practical consideration - there exists a patent within the Microsoft portfolio that either stands as prior art, or can be
brought to bear in litigation where the 3rd party aggressor is liable to infringe this patent, providing the basis for counter
suit. 

The logic of any insurance is to indemnify another against third party unforeseen events, usually excluding "acts of God", and
typically also excluding reasonably foreseeable events, such as leaving your keys in the ignition.

 - In developing your new service, is the potential for infringement of Microsoft IP foreseen as a likelihood in any event?

 - the customer of Azure, spending the agreed minimum amounts, already benefits from license or implied license of Microsoft IP,
 under what grounds can Microsoft claim infringement?

 - does, in fact, any natural aspect of a "insurance clause" apply where thee is no actual 3rd party?

 - from whom would, under this "insurance", the Azure customer, seek relief?

Having not fully read this contract in a formal setting, nonetheless I hope I shall be free to report openly, once we have, as
we're very interested in actually developing a service we think might only be possible with Azure, only fitting for users of
Azure really, but extending and modifying certain software characteristics that could be, in fact we may desire to be, directly
compared with existing Azure services*[1]

My appreciation is that the whole idea of indemnification from action by Microsoft, is a nullity by fact of inability to
construct a logical contract, and further the first remedy of Microsoft might in fact be to break the contract, rendering any
protection void. 

Where it gets a little stickier, is if a Azure customer infringes a very strong, valuable, 3rd party patent, *and in so
infringing, the use of Azure facilities is ruled - plausibly we think only in a lower court, before full arguments are heard,
but with litigation so slow, this is a important bit of "potential limbo" - ruled as being enabling of the infringement.

This would have to be such that if neither a specific function of Azure nor this "insurance" existed, this customer of Azure
would not have been able to *willingly and knowingly* infringe a big 3rd party patent, and the net result is that Microsoft
enjoins the 3rdparty action against the Azure customer.

This might have to be a real exception, where it makes sense for Microsoft to argue that its IP use grant and indemnity have
been misused knowingly and wrongly as the basis for willful infringement for this 3rd party patent - giving rise to 3rd party
suing you, 3rd party suing MS who joins to sue you for costs and liability thru misuse of their offerings.

/// assuming a whole lot of conditions, but to hand wave a vague idea: thus far no Azure customer has gone to market competing
with a deeply patent fenced product, such as CAD/CAM/CAE or such like, where extremely valuable patents exist. Imagine if there
were patents in Microsoft's graphics libraries, or even their license of OpenGL, without which you could not compete at all, but
one of which functions you could build a Azure - run product on, that targets a core AutoCAD customer base. 

This is, or may seem at first, really theoretical, but when writing for the desktop, the reason Windows has a advantage, often
is simply the licenses to use libraries embedding accumulated IP like this

But now we want to go beyond a G series server delivering remote applications, and do something about the unfortunate poverty of
graphics APIs in Azure that are anything like as useful as on Windows. 

Getting a touch more specific: the ability to virtualize apps remotely, is a highly attractive prospect, right down to being
able to set Group Policy to check against defined stores (which can be read only - really excellent use for optical drives on
the network!) for application signatures, and keeps us on Windows. But although it feels like full circle to OLE, we really want
to have our full app as a Azure service, for very strong economic reasons, roughly being this market desperately needs open
platforms but so high a degree of varietal implementations, even extensible desktop apps limit)  . And the shear breadth of
potential attack service when considering a Azure "app" that actually condenses a entire enterprise wide/deep stack of utility,
really almost invites pot shot from well funded incumbents.

i'll for obvious reasons not cite example closer to our speculation, which is just speculation, but then all interest in this
indemnity is the same, and of considerable practical interest, because some i speak to certainly think it changes the software
market significantly. I mean, really significantly. My spine twitched in a very positive way, in reaction to the new Microsoft
policies, because in theory, we could be delivering onto Linux desktops by choice - and in our market, Linux, even Solaris, is a
extremely large proportion of end user attention & activity. (trading, big local databases, need to on-prem v cloud at will,
latency / location requirements, yet also unusually high need to exist in a ecosystem for data capture that is firmly cloud).
Even generally, i think the move is for Microsoft to use Windows as the value add, (see Secure Productive Enterprise for a
license deal VARs don't want to sell because it replaces a huge stack for a modest cellular contract cost) but enable developers
to leverage Windows / dot Net as well as OSS without compunction as to end user environment. The specialisms involved in e.g.
great UX for handheld/wrist/voice UI so incline the chances of encountering strong required 3rd party IP, that the net benefit
we hope Microsoft is trying to deliver is applicable even where you write for Linux, but find delivery smoothed by Azure -
something we are finding ad hoc, but increasingly often. 

I hope, that by trying to show a path with a very vague example of my thinking, that I have shown how the question is either a
very moot one, or else one intensely strategic, serious, and complicated. 

So, the outcomes are ternary: the indemnity is worthless; the indemnity by putative assignment of a defensive patent has some
limited use, but you are defending not Microsoft directly, but MS + 3rd party; or "highly dependent on strategic evaluation".

I do not think that this contracts provides any straightforward indemnity against adverse action initiated by Microsoft,
however. Simply nothing in the context or wording leans towards supporting that interpretation.

However, in the event that Microsoft initiated suit claiming infringement of one of the portfolio of 10,000 patents covered by
the clauses within this contract, clearly the siutuation created by the contract would become a nullity. 

So, in dealing with 3rd party risks, the result could be quite open to interpretation, at least in early stage litigation.

However, as to your question on face value (and making a number of assumptions) then the answer is - if these assumptions became
fact, in particular the tort for infringement cited a patent among the 10,000 portfolio, then, yes, this would constitute
effective, but implied, mitigation and defense, which if the relevant clauses were enacted, and defense argued, would create a
nullity.

How this benefit for customers of Azure actually plays out, if it in fact is ever played out, might never encompass as risky and
interesting a scenario as that which I in passing posit. But I believe that in potential, Microsoft might have done a extremely
positive, open minded and market generative, act, in offering this standard term.

It gets more interesting, if you consider the possibility of two Azure customers, suing for infringement, where Microsoft IP
might come "in between" their claims. 

I have a tingling in my spine, thinking of the possibility, however so slight, that Microsoft created a perfect "Doomsday
Device", in true Dr. Strangelove terms. If only they had told someone about it.. 

Forgive me if my humor is as obtuse as IP law, at best, but it is so clearly in Microsoft's interests to  be able to charge fees
whilst opening their IP to leverage creating new markets, whilst quietly making their old monopoly platform a quite different
value add platform, but as essentially useful to many if not most corporate, and letting Linux devotees use private IP with -
effective freedoms - almost as liquid as the OSS culture requires, they, well - yes - I do see the way Redmond might enact use
of this clause as a blanket shelter for developers, even at considerable expense. The logic seems to justify every penny of such
a umbrella protection. If one day, maybe even soon, a customary Linux developer throws their applications open to a corporate
world using Azure for delivery, and are strongly protected from a aggressive incumbent long in the Windows ecosystem, then we
will see how serious Microsoft is about fairly opening up their ecosystems for new business. That could be a marquee day, for
many reasons we have long hoped for, regardless of where we stand on the software debates.


[0] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Legal_nullity

[1] this began simply, by long waiting for Azure Functions (AWS Lambda, only considerably more flexible) and wanting to extend
those with our own IP and data APIs, but essentially selling a service that is Functions + some sweet extra sauce that
compliments the tastes of the dishes our customers want to cook. In particular, we want our customers to extend and even white
label (potentially) our "Functions++". 
